# The ionosonde

 
<ol>
- <b>Model developed</b> from ionossonde data  

- Most ionosondes are equivalent to swept-frequency radars that look straght up  
       
-Co-located transmitter and receiver.  
- Also referred to as vertical ionosondes or vertically-incident ionosondes. 
      
- There are alse oblique ionosondes
       
-Transmitter and receiver separated.  
- Evaluate a specific path. 
          
</ol>


## What does an Ionsonde Measure?

   

-It meaures the time for a wave to go uo, to be turned around, and to come back down.  
- Thus the measurement is time, not height. 
- This tanslates to virtual height assuming the speed of light and mirror-like reflection. 
- The real wave does not get as high as the virtual height. 
  
    
<b> An ionosonde measures the time flight, not altitude, at each frequency </b>


## Sample Ionogram
   
- Red is ordinary wave, green is extraordinary wave. 
- Critical frequencies are highest frequencies are highest frequencies
 that are returned to Earth from each region at vertical incidence. 
- Electron density profile is derived from the ordinary wave data 
(along with assumptions about region thickness). 
    - Electron desity anywhere in the ionosphere is equivalente to
     plasma frequency to a plasma frequecy through the equation $f_p (Hz) = 9 \times N^{1/2}$ 
     with N in electrons/$m^3$ . 
  

   
   - E region and $F_2$ region have maximums in electron density.  
   - $F_1$ region is inflection point in electron density  
   - D region not measured.  
   - Nighttime data only consists od $F_2$ region and sporadic E due to TX ERP
and RX sensitivity (lower limit is ~2MHz) 
 
  


## How the ionosonde caractered the ionosphere 

   
- Ionosphere is caracterized in terms of critical frequencies ($foE$, $foF_1$, $foF_2$) 
and heights of maximum electron densities ($hmE$, $hmF_2$) 
  
   
- 'o' is ordinary, 'x' is extraordinary  
  

# F Region

   
- Model developed from many years of worldwide ionosonde data 
- Physical models of the atmosphere also contribute to model 
- In summary, lots of good ionosonde data to develop model    
    

   
[Critical angle]: Maximum angle at which radio waves are bent enough to return to earth. Moreover, 
decreses with increasing frequency.  
[Critical frequency]: Highest frequency at which radio waves sent straight up are bent enough to return to earth.    

### Waves reflection and Absortion in the ionosphere

- The stronger the ionization level, the more the waves will be bent 
- The shorter the wavelength (higher frequency), the less the waves will be bent.  
 - VHF and UHF are oobly slightly bent and almost never enough to return to earth.   
    
#### E Region


   
- Data on the daytime E region comes out of the ionogram 
- But the E region is under direct solar control  
   
- Measured daytime data not extremely important because we have a good alternate model 
that ties the E region to the solar zenith angle   
- Problem at night - E region critical frequency is usually below the low-frequency 
limit of an ionosonde...  
- Radars 
   
- Radars confirm that there is indeed a nighttime  valley in the electron density 
above the E region peak 
- Radars help us understand the E region under disturbed geomagnetic field conditions. 
- More refraction than D-region.  
- Less absortion than D-region.   
  
    
#### D Region


   
- Measuring the D region, whether at night or in the daytime, poses the toughest 
problem for ionospheric scientists 
   -Ionosondes don't have enought ERP    
- Radars and rocket flights fill the gap.  
- As one would expect from these limited availability techniques, our understanding 
of the D region and its variability leaves a lot to be desired  
   
-Not having a good understanding of D region (at least not as good as our 
understanding of the E and F regions) has the biggest impact to propagation on 
the lower frequencies - where absorption dominates in determing propation    
- Another technique used to deduce D region electron densities  
   
- Low frequency energy in an electromagnetic wave generated by a lightning 
discharge propagates in the Earth-ionosphere waveguide 
   
- Receceiving station can record the spectral characteristics of this 
propagating energy. 
- Vary a model of the D region election density to match its predicted 
spectral characteristics to the measured spectral characteristics. 
  
- Almost no refraction (bending) of radio waves. Almost completely absorbs radio waves below 10 MHz.     

